{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2639
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Oblique;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Bold;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red129\green131\blue134;\red255\green255\blue255;\red29\green138\blue207;
\red38\green38\blue38;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c57647\c58431\c59608;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c11765\c61569\c84706;
\cssrgb\c20000\c20000\c20000;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'01\'00;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid3}
{\list\listtemplateid4\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid301\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid4}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}{\listoverride\listid4\listoverridecount0\ls4}}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://world-nuclear.org/"}}{\fldrslt 
\f0\fs32 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Home}}
\f0\fs32 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \'a0/\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://world-nuclear.org/information-library.aspx"}}{\fldrslt Information Library}}\'a0/\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://world-nuclear.org/information-library/nuclear-fuel-cycle.aspx"}}{\fldrslt Nuclear Fuel Cycle}}\'a0/\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://world-nuclear.org/information-library/nuclear-fuel-cycle/uranium-resources.aspx"}}{\fldrslt Uranium Resources}}\'a0/\'a0The Cosmic Origins of Uranium\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa200\partightenfactor0

\fs64 \cf4 \strokec4 The Cosmic Origins of Uranium\cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa200\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\fs32 \cf5 \cb3 \strokec5 (Updated April 2021)
\f0\i0 \cb1 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0
\f2\b \cf5 \cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec5 Uranium is used to generate about 10% of our electricity worldwide, yet this fact pales into insignificance when we consider the role uranium has played in the evolution of the Earth.
\f0\b0 \cb1 \
\ls1\ilvl0
\f2\b \cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec5 The Earth's uranium had been thought to be produced in one or more supernovae over 6 billion years ago. More recent research suggests some uranium is formed in the merger of neutron stars.
\f0\b0 \cb1 \
\ls1\ilvl0
\f2\b \cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec5 Uranium later became enriched in the continental crust.
\f0\b0 \cb1 \
\ls1\ilvl0
\f2\b \cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec5 Radioactive decay contributes about half of the Earth\'92s heat flux.
\f0\b0 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa200\partightenfactor0
\cf5 \cb3 Geologists and geochemists have been studying the abundance, distribution and chronometric potential of the isotopes of uranium for more than a century. Their work stems from Klaproth's discovery in 1789 of the heaviest naturally occurring element, Becquerel's demonstration in 1896 that uranium salts are radioactive, Boltwood's conclusion in 1905 that lead as well as helium is a decay product of uranium, and Rutherford's suggestion in 1906 of the geological time-keeping potential of radioactivity. From a geochemical point of view, some of the major questions are:\cb1 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls2\ilvl0\cf5 \cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	1	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec5 Where did the uranium now in the Earth come from?\cb1 \
\ls2\ilvl0\cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	2	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec5 What effects has the comparatively trivial uranium content of the Earth had on the evolution of the planet and, conversely, are there feedbacks controlling the geochemical cycle of uranium that vary secularly (i.e. over long, indefinite periods of time)?\cb1 \
\ls2\ilvl0\cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	3	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec5 Can we track through time the way uranium has been recycled through the exosphere, crust and mantle of the Earth?\cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa200\partightenfactor0

\fs38\fsmilli19200 \cf4 \cb3 \strokec4 Cosmic abundance of elements\cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa200\partightenfactor0

\fs32 \cf5 \cb3 \strokec5 For many years, since the 1930s, a large number of scientists have been occupied with determining the abundances of the elements and their isotopes in the objects comprising the solar system, and with accounting for the abundance patterns observed. In fact, spectroscopic measurements show that the abundances of elements in stars vary and that there is no single applicable 'cosmic abundance' pattern.\cb1 \
\cb3 Closer to home, there are major differences in abundances of the elements in the various planets that orbit our hydrogen-helium dominated Sun. The terrestrial planets, including the Earth, are relatively depleted in the potentially gaseous or volatile elements (hydrogen, helium, carbon and neon) and are dominated by elements of low and even atomic number (oxygen, magnesium, silicon and iron). On this scale, uranium \'96 the abundance of which in the Sun is only 10
\fs24 -12
\fs32 \'a0that of hydrogen \'96 is an exceedingly rare element. Furthermore, measurements of oxygen isotopes in meteorites show that the solar system as a whole is not homogeneous in terms of isotopic ratios. All these variations point to a conclusion that multiple sources were involved in the production of proto-solar system material.\cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa200\partightenfactor0

\fs38\fsmilli19200 \cf4 \cb3 \strokec4 Where did uranium come from?\cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa200\partightenfactor0

\fs32 \cf5 \cb3 \strokec5 Cosmochemists have been concerned not only with patterns and secular trends of abundance of the elements in galaxies but also with the origins of abundance anomalies in particular stars and with theories on the synthesis of different nuclei to account for these observations. According to these theories, the Earth's uranium was produced in one or more supernovae ("An explosive brightening of a star in which the energy radiated by it increases by a factor of ten billion... A supernova explosion occurs when a star has burned up all its available nuclear fuel and the core collapses catastrophically." - Oxford Dictionary of Physics). The main process concerned was the rapid capture of neutrons on seed nuclei at rates greater than disintegration through radioactivity. The neutron fluxes required are believed to occur during the catastrophically explosive stellar events called supernovae. Gravitational compression of iron (the island of nuclear stability, incapable of further exothermic fusion reactions) and sudden collapse in the centre of a massive star triggers the explosive ejection of much of the star into space, together with a flood of neutrons. Remnants of hundreds of supernovae have been found.\cb1 \
\cb3 More recently, a second theory has proposed that uranium is created during the merger of two neutron stars. Neutron stars are very dense, with a teaspoon of neutron star material having a mass of the order of 5 billion tonnes. When two such bodies come close together the intense gravitational forces cause them to violently merge, giving off gravitational waves and producing huge amounts of heavy elements, such as gold, platinum and uranium.\cb1 \
\cb3 So, we know that the Earth's uranium was produced through one or more of these processes, and that this material was inherited by the solar system of which the Earth is a part.\cb1 \
\cb3 We can estimate how long ago this synthesis of uranium occurred, given:\cb1 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0\cf5 \cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec5 The present day abundances of U-235 and U-238 in the various 'shells' forming our planet.\cb1 \
\ls3\ilvl0\cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec5 A knowledge of the half-lives of these isotopes.\cb1 \
\ls3\ilvl0\cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec5 The age of the Earth (
\f1\i ca.
\f0\i0 \'a04.55 billion years) \'96 known from various radiometric 'clocks', including those of the uranium-to-lead decay chains.\cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa200\partightenfactor0
\cf5 \cb3 We can calculate the abundances of U-235 and U-238 at the time the Earth was formed. Knowing further that the production ratio of U-235 to U-238 in a supernova is about 1.65, we can calculate that if all of the uranium now in the solar system were made in a single supernova, this event must have occurred some 6.5 billion years ago.\cb1 \
\cb3 This 'single stage' is, however, an oversimplification. In fact, multiple supernovae from over 6 billion to about 200 million years ago were involved. Additionally, studies of the isotopic abundances of elements, such as silicon and carbon in meteorites, have shown that more than ten separate stellar sources were involved in the genesis of solar system material. Thus the relative abundance of U-235 and U-238 at the time of formation of the solar system:\cb1 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls4\ilvl0\cf5 \cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec5 Cannot be inverted to a 'single stage' model age.\cb1 \
\ls4\ilvl0\cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec5 Is essentially an accidental and unique value.\cb1 \
\ls4\ilvl0\cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec5 Reflects the input of the explosive debris of many progenitor stars.\cb1 \
}